---
layout: post
title: Reading Files - Digimon CSV
subtitle: Lab 1
gh-repo:
gh-badge:
tags:
comments: true
---

Given a CSV file containing the stats of every Digimon from the series, three tasks were required:

1. Find the average speed of the Digimon.
2. Write a function `count_digimon()` that can count the number of Digimon with a specific attribute (e.g. `count_digimon("Type", "Vaccine")` would return 70).
3. Name a team of up to 3 Digimon with less than 15 memory and more than 300 attack in total.

In working on this lab, I collaborated with Ellen Wang and Isabelle Fic.

## Finding the average speed

To calculate the average speed of the Digimon in the CSV file, the sum of each Digimon's speed must be divided by the total number of digimon.

To find this information, I began by defining a function `average_speed` that opens the file `digimon.csv` and reads it as a set of dictionaries.

~~~
def average_speed():
    with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f:
        data = csv.DictReader(f)
~~~

Then, with the CSV open, I defined the two totals needed to calculate the average speed: the sum of all speeds and the number of digimon in the dataset.

~~~
sum_of_speed = 0
digimon = 0
~~~

I constructed a for-loop that iterates through each `row` of the `data`, adding the digimon of that row's speed to the total speed and adding 1 to the total number of digimon.

~~~
for row in data:
  sum_of_speed += int(row["Spd"])
  digimon += 1
~~~

Finally, after iterating through the whole CSV, the final totals are used in the following calculation to find the `average_speed`: `average_speed = sum_of_speed / digimon`.

## Counting a specific attribute

To outline my process in developing a function `count_digimon` to count the amount of a specific attribute, I wrote the following pseudocode:

~~~
def count_digimon(category, attribute):
  with digimon.csv open:
    data is digimon.csv as a list of dictionaries
    set the counter to 0
    iterate through each row/dictionary of the data
      if the dictionary's given category = the given attribute:
        increase the counter by 1
    print the total count
~~~

Which I converted into python:

~~~
def count_digimon(k, v):
    with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f:
        data = csv.DictReader(f)
        count = 0
        for row in data:
            if row[k] == v:
                count += 1
        print(count, "digimon are characterized by", k, v)
~~~

Thus, when `count_digimon("Type", "Vaccine")` was run, `70` was printed.

## Building a team

For this task, I came up with two potential methods of constructing possible teams:
1. Picking a random Digimon, picking a second random Digimon that satisfies the memory limit, and picking a third random Digimon, if necessary, to satisfy the attack minimum.
2. Iterating through every possible pair and trio and finding every team that fits the requirements.

Ultimately, I chose the latter option. The first part of my function `build_team()` finds every possible pair of Digimon, and the second part of the function finds every possible trio of Digimon.

Since this method requires iterating through the CSV multiple times for each row in the file, I opened as many as three `digimon.csv` files at once to be able to compare rows with each other.

Initially, to find every possible trio, for example, I opened each simultaneous file at the top of the function as follows:

~~~
with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f1:
  data1 = csv.DictReader(f1)
  with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f2:
    data2 = csv.DictReader(f2)
    with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f3:
      data3 = csv.DictReader(f3)
~~~

Then after the above section of code, I iterated through `data1`, `data2`, and `data3` to find possible combinations like this:

~~~
for row1 in data1:
  for row2 in data2:
    for row3 in data3:
      if int(row1["Memory"]) + int(row2["Memory"]) + int(row3["Memory"]) <= 15 and int(row1["Atk"]) + int(row2["Atk"]) + int(row3["Atk"]) >= 300:
        working_teams.append([row1, row2, row3]) #working_teams is the list of acceptable teams
~~~

However, the code did not properly iterate through `data1` and `data2`, as `working_teams` only contained teams with the first Digimon in the CSV (Kuramon) as team members 1 and 2. `data3`, through, successfully iterated through every Digimon in the file.

After some trial and error, I realized that the `with open()` statement needed to be placed directly before the individual iterations of `data1`, `data2`, and `data3`. I believe the likely reason is that since `with open()` automatically closes the file after specified operations are completeed, the CSV files were closed when iteration began for each nested for-loop.

Thus, the `with open()` statements were moved to the aforementioned locations, resulting in the following code:

~~~
with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f1:
  data1 = csv.DictReader(f1)
  for row1 in data1:
    with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f2:
      data2 = csv.DictReader(f2)
      for row2 in data2:
        with open("digimon/digimon.csv", "r") as f3:
          data3 = csv.DictReader(f3)
          for row3 in data3:
            if int(row1["Memory"]) + int(row2["Memory"]) + int(row3["Memory"]) <= 15 and int(row1["Atk"]) + int(row2["Atk"]) + int(row3["Atk"]) >= 300:
              working_teams.append([row1, row2, row3])
~~~

Finally, a random number `n` is generated within the length of the list `working_teams`.

Index `n` is located in `working_teams` and is printed, naming a possible Digimon team that fits all the necessary requirements.

## Areas of improvement

While the code executes properly and fulfills the necessary tasks, the `build_team()` function takes a long time to be run. The delay is likely because the computer has to iterate through the very long list of Digimon multiple tiems.

Therefore, it would have been more preferable to figure out a method that does not require as much processing time.